---
layout: post
title: 'PyCon 2019 Recap'
tags: pycon python pent
---

Two years or so ago, I was delighted to learn that PyCon was going to be in Cleveland
for both the 2018 and 2019 meetings, putting it only about a 3-hour drive from
my house. I'd been hacking on Python stuff for a few years by that point,
and was excited to have the chance to rub elbows with some of the
people I'd been interacting with online in various ways.  In 2018, I got to
say hello to the big Python podcasters,
Michael Kennedy {% include tw.html user="mkennedy" %},
Brian Okken {% include tw.html user="brianokken" %}, and
Tobias Macey {% include tw.html user="tobiasmacey" %}, as well as
Travis Oliphant {% include tw.html user="teoliphant" -%},
Ernest W. Durbin {% include tw.html user="ewdurbin" %},
Brett Cannon {% include tw.html user="brettsky" %}, and numerous
other well-known figures in the Python universe.  I also had the chance to
eat lunch with Guido {% include tw.html user="gvanrossum" %} and others from
Dropbox, which was quite fun. All in all, it definitely whetted my
appetite to return in 2019.

This year, I was able to attend for all three days of talks, plus part of
the first day of sprints.  This post is an attempt to record everything I can
recall about the experience, though I'm sure I've forgotten a substantial
fraction. Apologies to anyone I've missed, or for any incorrect details!
Lacking any particular organizational plan for this, I'm just tossing
everything into a few sets of loosely-related bullets/sections.
It was a great experience, though, and I **highly** recommend that anyone
interested in attending a future PyCon should make the effort
to come if at all possible!  
&nbsp;

**Lightning Talk**

I got to give a lightning talk! I submitted `pent`
{% include gh.html user="bskinn" repo="pent" -%}
{%- include pypi.html project="pent" %},
my early-stage side project for extraction of structured data from free text,
and was slotted into the Saturday PM session {% include yt.html id="sRwHWPDJBnk" time="1050" %}.
I thought it went quite well,
especially given that I made a live code demo of it. (Typing accurately through
stage nerves is an ... interesting...  challenge.)
As I mentioned in the talk, the [docs](https://pent.readthedocs.io)
are still in progress...they're the next thing on my list after I finish this post...
*and* after I take care of my slides for
[PyOhio](https://www.pyohio.org/2019/presentations/137)(!!) :-D

I need to make particular note here, though: the talk wouldn't have happened
if not for the generosity of Jonas Neubert
{% include tw.html user="jonemo" %}, who loaned me his laptop for a couple
of hours.  Thanks again, and my apologies for leaving your `cmd` windows
set to 28-pt black-on-white....  
&nbsp;

**Packaging Mini-Summit**

I had decided to stay for one day of sprints, if I could;
I'd learned about the
[Packaging Mini-Summit](https://discuss.python.org/t/pycon-us-packaging-mini-summit-2019/833)
planned for that day, and figured it would be a good way to get more insight
into some of the internals of the packaging decision-making,
and maybe even help out some.
In order to kickstart discussions and help people recognize one another,
a PyPA/packaging meet-and-greet open space had been scheduled for first-thing Friday morning.
I briefly met Carol Willing
{% include tw.html user="WillingCarol" %},
Sumana Harihareswara {% include tw.html user="brainwane" %},
Chris Jerdonek {% include tw.html user="cjerdonek" %},
and Pradyun Gedam {% include tw.html user="pradyunsg" %} there,
as well as at least 3-4 other people whose names didn't stick (sorry!).
The mini-summit was scheduled to be part of the packaging sprints,
which Sumana was broadly orchestrating.  First-thing on Monday, I was tasked
with co-facilitating the process of onboarding some people new to Python packaging
via running through the
[official PyPA packaging tutorial](https://packaging.python.org/tutorials/packaging-projects/),
which mostly involved answering a handful of questions while everyone otherwise ~breezed through.

During this initial chunk of time, Brett Cannon {% include tw.html user="brettsky" %} came over
briefly to say hello, and I remarked about how I'd unexpectedly been put in charge of a thing.
He noted that it's really not that hard to "move up in the ranks" within the Python
community ... that all it really takes is being nice and expressing a desire to help out.
Pretty straightforward!

The mini-summit started up mid-morning, broke over lunch, and wrapped up in the
early afternoon.
Paul Ganssle {% include tw.html user="pganssle" %}
led most (all?) of the summit, ceding the floor to domain experts as relevant.
Requests for topics to discuss had been solicited through a
[discuss.python.org](https://discuss.python.org/t/packaging-mini-summit-pycon-us-2019-topic-suggestions/1534)
post, with priority decided based on the combined number of likes on each topic at
the discuss.python post plus the number of in-person 'in favor' votes. The following topics
were addressed:

 - Status of PyPA Security Grant
 - External Dependencies
 - PyPA Governance
 - Future of Editable Installs
 - Strictness of PyPI/pip with Regard to Metadata
 - src/ Layout
 - Storage of Requested/Installed Extras
 - Mechanism to Upload Wheels for Packages Owned by Others

More detail (*lots* more) can be found at the
[Google Doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wz2-ECkicJgAmQDxMFivWmU2ZunKvPZ2UfQ59zDGj7g/edit#)
housing the notes from both the mini-summit and from the remainder of the sprints.
I had volunteered to take notes throughout the mini-summit, as had
Chris Wilcox {% include tw.html user="chriswilcox47" %}; he put together the majority of the
mini-summit content in the Doc, and I filled in some gaps/details where I could.  
&nbsp;

**Talks**

CAVEAT: I'm writing these summaries a month after I actually attended the talks,
so sincere apologies if I get details wrong.  Correct me
@pylogging {% include tw.html user="pylogging" %}. &lt;grin&gt;


- **Keynote, Russell Keith-Magee** {% include tw.html user="freakboy3742" %} {% include yt.html id="ftP5BQh1-YM" %}  
*Fri AM*  
The overall theme of the talk centered on the 'Black Swan' concept of significant events
that are unpredictable in advance but seem obvious in retrospect,
based on the [book of the same title](https://books.google.com/books?id=gWW4SkJjM08C)
by Nassim Nicholas Taleb, as applied to Python.  Russell highlighted a few
possible Python Black Swans, and described some of his experiences
in trying to address them through his work on the BeeWare project.
He specifically made the point, though, that the most important Python Black Swan
over the next decade may well be something that no one has thought of yet.
He used the stories of the
[*Australia&nbsp;II* yacht](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/America%27s_Cup#1956%E2%80%931987:_The_Twelve-Metre_Rule)
and
[C. Y. O'Connor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C._Y._O%27Connor)
as examples/metaphors providing food for thought on the nature of open source in
general, and Python in particular, and inspiring a handful of calls to action.


- **"Wily Python: Writing simpler and more maintainable Python"** {% include yt.html id="dqdsNoApJ80" %}  
Anthony Shaw {% include tw.html user="anthonypjshaw" %}  
*Fri PM*  
I'd heard about
`wily` {% include pypi.html project="wily" %}
before, probably on either Talk Python or Python Bytes, and so I stopped into Anthony's
talk to learn a bit more. I still don't fully grok cyclomatic complexity, and I'd definitely have to
do a bunch more detailed reading to understand the math behind the metrics `wily` uses,
but I definitely feel like I'd have a pretty solid idea of the meaning behind the metrics
if I ever decided to add `wily` onto any of my projects.


- **Lightning Talks** {% include yt.html id="yFcCuinRVnU" %}  
*Fri PM*  
I caught part of the lightning talks Friday afternoon; out of all of them, the one that
stuck most in memory was by
Anthony Lupinetti {% include gh.html user="lupinetti" %} {% include gh.html user="opensourcekids" %},
which described a Scratch-like modular language built on Python and Google's
`blockly` {% include gh.html user="google" repo="blockly" %}, called
[Snappy Code](http://snappycode.org) {% include yt.html id="yFcCuinRVnU" time="2850" %}.
I suspect our older son will be at an age soon
where programming will start to interest him, and Snappy Code seems like it has
the potential to be a great starting point.


- **Keynote, Shadeed "Sha" Wallace-Stepter** {% include linkedin.html user="sha-stepter-828647183" %}
*(no video available)*  
*Sat AM*  
I ended up getting to the convention center on the late side Saturday morning, so I only caught
part of Sha's keynote. The main hall was *packed*, so I ended up listening from the
overflow area in the trade show area and probably missed a number of details.
What parts I *did* catch were really impressive. Sha was fortunate to have
so many resources made available to him through the prison system he was in,
and did a great job making and sticking to a plan for trying to build a new
life. Sha's keynote covered far more ground, though; check out Jessica McKellar's
recap Twitter thread {% include tw.html user="jessicamckellar" id="1127639822640660482" %}
for a more complete overview.


- **Keynote, Jessica McKellar** {% include tw.html user="jessicamckellar" %} *(no video available)*  
*Sat AM*  
I heard Jessica's talk from the overflow area also, and thus probably also missed
a number of details here, too.  However, she made a compelling case that the US prison
system, as currently constituted, (1) does a decidedly poor job of providing
rehabilitated individuals the resources and connections they need to actually
get clear of a cycle of release and reincarceration, and (2) operates in
a manner that leads to substantial racial disparities. She posed a challenge
to everyone in the room, to make a concrete difference in their local
context prior to PyCon 2020; see her Twitter thread
recap {% include tw.html user="jessicamckellar" id="1127640196256677890" %}
for more details.


- **"Floats are Friends: making the most of IEEE754.00000000000000002"** {% include yt.html id="zguLmgYWhM0" %}  
David Wolever {% include tw.html user="wolever" %}  
*Sat AM*  
This talk definitely won my "cleverest title" award for the meeting.
I use variations on Dory's "Just Keep Swimming!" all the time, so I was an immediate
sucker for 'floats are friends' in particular.  I also was interested in the
technical aspects of the talk, though--I knew generally that floats
can't represent the entire number line
to arbitrary precision and that this behavior can cause subtle problems,
but I very much appreciated this overview of the details of float implementation.


- **"8 things that happen at the dot: Attribute Access & Descriptors"** {% include yt.html id="6cDtA_uzqg0" %}  
Andy Fundinger {% include tw.html user="Andriod" %}  
*Sat PM*  
This is probably the talk that I'm most likely to re-watch repeatedly for my own
edification. Attribute access kicks off a ***crazy-complicated*** series of
context-dependent dunder method calls, and AFAICT this talk neatly both summarized that
call cascade and described how it can be tweaked/hijacked for fun and/or profit and/or
mischief.


- **Lightning Talks** {% include yt.html id="sRwHWPDJBnk" %}  
*Sat PM*  
I was at this entire session of lightning talks, though I wasn't really able
to pay close attention to many of them due to nerves from either being
about to speak, or having just spoken.  The one talk I remembered most
clearly from the session was one by Scott
Sanderson {% include tw.html user="scottbsanderson" %}, where he'd
fiddled about in the internals of Python to allow one to define types
without having to use the `self` instance reference, or even the `class` keyword.
{% include yt.html id="sRwHWPDJBnk" time="2370" %} Fascinating, yet horrifying!


- **Keynote, Python Steering Council** {% include gh.html user="python" repo="steering-council" %} {% include yt.html id="8dDp-UHBJ_A" %}  
Barry Warsaw {% include tw.html user="pumpichank" %},
Brett Cannon {% include tw.html user="brettsky" %},
Carol Willing {% include tw.html user="WillingCarol" %},
Guido van Rossum {% include tw.html user="gvanrossum" %},
Nick Coghlan {% include tw.html user="ncoghlan_dev" %}  
*Sun AM*  
I frankly don't recall a lot of the specifics from this keynote, but I definitely enjoyed it.
With the transition in Python governance to the Steering Council model,
I think it was valuable and important for the Council to have this opportunity
to introduce people to themselves. The laid-back, conversational format worked
really well, I thought.  I'll reiterate here what I said on
Twitter back in February {% include tw.html user="bskinn" id="1092579298303717376" %}:
I was really glad to hear that
Guido {% include tw.html user="gvanrossum" %} was willing to be a member of the
Council, and that the stresses leading to his stepping back as BDFL hadn't
turned him off from a prominent role in Python leadership.


- **[Poster, "Exploring Scientific Databases with Python"](https://us.pycon.org/2019/schedule/posters/list/#presentation-144)**  
Andrey Smelter {% include tw.html user="smelandr" %}  
*Sun AM*  
Here, Andrey presented on some work he had done to develop a robust method for importing a particular
chemoinformatics data format (can't remember which one...). It struck close to home,
being along similar lines to `pent` {% include gh.html user="bskinn" repo="pent" %},
and I enjoyed learning a bit about why and how he'd put his tool together.


- **"A New Era in Python Governance"** {% include yt.html id="mAC83JVDzL8" %}  
Shauna Gordon-McKeon {% include tw.html user="shauna_gm" %}  
*Sun PM*  
In this talk, Shauna provided an overview of the mechanics of the transition to the
Steering Council model, after Guido's {% include tw.html user="gvanrossum" %} stepping back
from the BDFL role last year.  It was a great counterpart to the Steering Council keynote
earlier in the day. I had kept an eye on the process as it developed,
so I was familiar with most of the high-level content,
but there were some smaller details I hadn't been aware of.
For anyone who didn't follow the transition, though, I expect it was
quite informative.


- **"Lowering the Stakes of Failure with Pre-mortems and Post-mortems"** {% include yt.html id="bmMBA6SDirU" %}  
Liz Sander {% include tw.html user="sander_liz" %}  
*Sun PM*  
Not being a professional developer, I haven't had the experience of debriefs
after the emergence of major problems with a piece of code.
So, those aspects were interesting to me as a window into the experiences
of professional developers.  Additionally, coming from a chemical engineering background,
the pre-mortem and post-mortem concepts reminding me strongly of best practices
in the chemical process industry: respectively, the
[Process Hazard Analysis](https://www.fauske.com/blog/qa-on-pha-the-who-what-where-when-and-why-of-process-hazards-analysis)
conducted during the design phase of a new process, and the
[Near-Miss Analysis](https://riskcenter.wharton.upenn.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/03-01-JP.pdf)
(Phimister et al. *Risk Analysis* **23**(3): 445, 2003).
In both contexts, the pre-mortem seeks to answer the question
*What all could go wrong, and how can we minimize that likelihood?*,
and the post-mortem tries to answer
*What went wrong here, and how can we try to avoid it happening in the future?*.
Very good talk; the emphasis on facilitating non-accusatory post-mortems
was especially important, I think.


- **"Escape from auto-manual testing with Hypothesis!"** {% include yt.html id="KcyGUVzL7HA" %}  
Zac Hatfield-Dodds {% include gh.html user="Zac-HD" %}  
*Sun PM*  
Quoting myself {% include tw.html user="btskinn" id="1140620536797683712" %}:
"I want to pick up `hypothesis` someday and actually make sense of how to use it.
I've attended a couple of talks and
[listened](https://pythonbytes.fm/episodes/show/30/you-are-not-google-and-other-ruminations)
to a [couple](https://talkpython.fm/episodes/show/67/property-based-testing-with-hypothesis)
of [podcasts](https://testandcode.com/33)
on it, and I still just don't quite get how property-based testing would be useful,
at least to the projects I'm working on."
This was a solid talk, which cemented my confidence that `hypothesis` is worth learning,
but it unfortunately still left me unsure how to get started.
Fortunately, I posted the above tweet in reply to one by
David MacIver {% include tw.html user="DRMacIver" id="1140617026265899008" %}
(who I only later realized is the *author* of
`hypothesis` {% include pypi.html project="hypothesis" %} &lt;facepalm&gt;),
who pointed me to
[a really good intro article](https://hypothesis.works/articles/incremental-property-based-testing/)
and (indirectly) reassured me {% include tw.html user="DRMacIver" id="1140628983735824384" %}
that I'm not alone in my mystification. 


- **Keynote, Nina Zakharenko** {% include tw.html user="nnja" %} {% include yt.html id="35mXD40SvXM" %}  
*Sun PM*  
Nina's keynote was just *fun*. She demo-ed the Circuit Playground Express (CPX) that all attendees
got as part of their swag bag, illustrating the simplicity of controlling
the board just by editing its magic CircuitPython `code.py` module,
all as part of a broader intro to the wide range of microcontroller-based projects
that are now widely accessible thanks to a powerful combination of hardware and software.
Her talk provided some pointers on effective use of the CPX built-in LEDs, pushbutton and switch,
and she noted some non-obvious gotchas to working with a CPX
that will probably be helpful to newcomers
(e.g., adding a `sleep` while polling the pushbutton status to avoid multiple logic-signal
events being fired from a single button press).
In addition, she held up admirably in the face of repeated signal issues
from the camera she had pointed at the board...just fiddled with it until it
started behaving again and kept on going.  
&nbsp; 

**Events/Connections/Conversations**

- I ended up spending a fair amount of time at the JetBrains booth on the
trade show floor, where I:
  - Talked to Matt Harrison
{% include tw.html user="__mharrison__" %} about his training services
  - Got some tips about tracking down PyCharm keyboard shortcuts from
Elizaveta Shashkova {% include tw.html user="lisa_shashkova" %}.
  - Talked a bit with a few other JetBrains employees, as well as with
Michael Kennedy {% include tw.html user="mkennedy" %},
Christopher Burke {% include tw.html user="captainbatman" %}, and
Stephen Schroeder {% include linkedin.html user="stephenschroeder7" %}.
  - Was in the audience for the live recording of Python Bytes
{% include tw.html user="pythonbytes" %}
([#129](https://pythonbytes.fm/episodes/show/129/maintaining-a-python-project-when-it-s-not-your-job)),
which I had missed last year.
  - Caught bits and pieces of some of the various content-creators'
    mini-presentations they'd scheduled

- I ran into Brian Okken {% include tw.html user="brianokken" %} a couple
of different times, and in one of those conversations I asked him about
parametrizing pytest fixtures.  I had tried just applying
`@mark.parametrize`, but that didn't work at all. The discussion
prompted me to take a closer look at the pytest docs, whereupon I
learned that you have to [pass the parametrization iterable to the
*params* argument of
`@pytest.fixture()`](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/fixture.html#parametrizing-fixtures).
I of course promptly [reorganized some rather smelly test
code](https://github.com/bskinn/sphobjinv/commit/4f0c43afcd535a535ef2952a7023070633537ea6)
in one of my packages, `sphobjinv`
{% include gh.html user="bskinn" repo="sphobjinv" %} {% include pypi.html project="sphobjinv" %}.

- Friday evening I tagged along with a group headed out to dinner, and ended up talking
mostly to Pradyun {% include tw.html user="pradyunsg" %} and
Jonas Neubert {% include tw.html user="jonemo" %}, plus a couple of quick exchanges with
Julian Berman {% include tw.html user="JulianWasTaken" %} {% include gh.html user="Julian" %}.
This proved serendipitous, given Jonas's generosity in loaning his laptop
for my lightning talk.

- During the job fair/poster session on Sunday, I saw
Russell Keith-Magee {% include tw.html user="freakboy3742" %}
and chatted with him a bit, mostly about his
[keynote](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ftP5BQh1-YM)
and what the future of [BeeWare](https://beeware.org) in particular, and Python in general,
might look like.

- After the closing keynotes on Sunday, I ran into
Meredydd Luff {% include tw.html user="meredydd" %} and
Ian Davies {% include tw.html user="daviesian_cam" %} of
[Anvil fame](https://anvil.works) {% include tw.html user="anvil_works" %},
and talked to Ian for a little while. I'd talked to Meredydd a bit at
PyCon 2018, and it was good to learn more from Ian about how Anvil works
under the hood and how things are going for them.  The Anvil booth
was consistently **packed** this year, so they've clearly gotten
a lot of people's attention!

- This conversation with Ian was fortuitous, because during the course of it
a group of people convened in the vicinity and started making dinner plans.
One of them was Pradyun {% include tw.html user="pradyunsg" %},
who very kindly invited me along.  So, I ended up getting dinner and
ice cream with Pradyun,
Sumana {% include tw.html user="brainwane" %},
Nathaniel Smith {% include tw.html user="vorpalsmith" %},
Josh Oreman {% include gh.html user="oremanj" %}, and
Sviatoslav Sydorenko {% include tw.html user="webKnjaZ" %},
which was a really great time.
There was an unexpectedly prolific amount of
[ST:TNG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star_Trek:_The_Next_Generation) and
[Square One TV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Square_One_Television)/
[Mathnet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathnet) geeking-out
with Sumana, which was **awesome**.

- During the brief 'Python packaging newcomers' session Monday morning,
I met someone who'd bookmarked my
[pyproject.toml/src post]({% post_url 2019-04-01-My-How-Why-Pyproject-Src %})
for later use---THAT was simultaneously a cool and also a decidedly *odd*
experience ... "Somebody I don't know actually read my thing!"

- At lunch on Monday, I happened to sit at the same table as
Anthony Sottile {% include tw.html user="codewithanthony" %},
and it was great to have the chance to talk to him in person for a bit.
